Hey, welcome back. On today's episode — the guy who just took over America's largest public land agency comes straight from oil and gas, orchardists in the Okanagan want to drill into an aquifer to fight drought, and we're asking who actually decides what happens to the wild spaces we walk through when the person in charge changes but the land doesn't. That and more, coming right up.
Welcome to Cariboo Signals, an AI-generated review of the latest tech news and ideas that impact our rural communities. It's Friday, July 10th, 2026. Coming to you from the Cariboo, on lands that have been cared for by the Secwépemc, Tŝilhqot'in, and Dakelh peoples since time immemorial. Today's theme is Wild Spaces & Outdoor Life — I'm Casey.
And I'm Riley. We're spending today on the backcountry, the wildfire risk, drought pressure on water, and the tools — and the politics — that shape how people actually move through this landscape.
Quick weather sweep before we dig in — Horsefly Lake's sitting at 13 degrees with partly cloudy skies, headed to a high of 20 today and a low around 10 tonight. Tomorrow's bringing light drizzle, about a millimetre of precipitation. Across the rest of the region — 100 Mile House is at 14 and mainly clear, Williams Lake's at 12 and overcast, Quesnel's at 14 and mainly clear, and out on the Chilcotin plateau, Alexis Creek is sitting at 13 with some cloud cover.
Good day to be outside before that drizzle rolls in tomorrow. Let's get into it.
We're opening with land itself today — who's protecting it, who's drawing water from under it, and who's deciding what it's for. First up, closer to home: the province announced new protected wetland habitat in the Omineca region, expanding wildlife management areas to the north of us.
The province is framing it as biodiversity, clean water, and recreation all folded into one designation — multi-use protection rather than a single-purpose park boundary. That means non-motorized recreation generally stays open, while resource activity gets case-by-case review instead of an automatic green light.
Multi-use is doing a lot of work in that sentence, though. Protection with an asterisk usually means somebody's still got a tenure inside the boundary, just under closer watch.
It's a real step up from unprotected Crown land, even with the asterisk. The rural angle here is straightforward — Omineca sits in the same broader ecosystem as parts of our own watershed, and wetland protection upstream affects water quality downstream, all the way into Cariboo river systems.
A much bigger structural story out of the US, and it's the one anchoring our Deep Dive today. Stevan Pearce was sworn in as director of the Bureau of Land Management back in May — the agency overseeing two hundred and forty-five million acres, more public land than any other federal agency holds. Unlike previous directors, who typically came up through land-management agencies or state environmental posts, Pearce is a former congressman with a long career in oil and gas.
Outside Online sat down with him and asked directly how he plans to weigh conservation and recreation against industry demand — a genuinely open question with places like Bears Ears in the balance. We'll dig into what that appointment says about how land decisions actually get made, here and elsewhere, a little later.
Sticking with land and water — the Williams Lake Tribune reports Okanagan orchardists are proposing to drill into the regional aquifer to get through the current drought. An apple orchard operator has floated a well directly across from the regional district office, hoping to secure groundwater as surface supply keeps tightening.
Drought pushing agricultural operators underground for water used to be a once-a-decade event in this province. It's shaping up to be closer to an annual conversation now.
And the tension is real on both sides — orchardists need water now, this growing season, or they lose the crop. But aquifers recharge on geologic time, not growing-season time. Drill enough new wells into the same aquifer and you're borrowing against water nobody's actually replacing.
The rural angle for us: the Cariboo has its own shallow aquifers feeding domestic wells and ranch operations. Whatever precedent gets set in the Okanagan on permitting emergency drilling will likely shape how our own regional district handles the same request when, not if, it comes here.
Related, if a little further afield — the Tribune also picked up a tornado touching down near the Alberta-Saskatchewan border this week, sending three people to hospital. Not our region, but it's part of the same pattern of more volatile summer weather showing up across the Prairies and into our own foothills.
Severe convective weather events have been trending up across Western Canada for a few years now — not a single-season anomaly.
From drought and storms to solitude — Outside Online ran a piece this week on Dick Proenneke, the outdoorsman who spent decades living alone in Alaska's backcountry, using him as a lens on what people are calling the male loneliness epidemic. The writer went up there after a divorce, looking for healing, following Proenneke's old route.
What she found wasn't a cure, according to the piece — it was a way of living. Self-reliance as an ongoing practice rather than a one-time fix for isolation.
There's a version of that same argument running through a lot of Cariboo communities that lost a mill and kept a trapline. Solitude out here isn't automatically isolation — but it isn't automatically healthy either. Depends entirely on whether it's chosen or just what's left.
Shifting south of the border for a policy story with air-quality implications up here — NPR reports the EPA is proposing to weaken heavy-duty truck pollution rules, calling the Biden-era emissions standards "unworkable." Trucking industry groups are celebrating the rollback; environmental groups are calling it a serious step backward.
Every logging road and highway corridor through the Chilcotin runs on heavy diesel trucks. Loosen emissions rules at the federal level in the US and the effect on air quality doesn't stay contained at the border — particulate and ground-level ozone drift.
It's also worth flagging the timing — this rollback proposal lands right as wildfire smoke season is ramping up here, which means two separate sources of degraded air quality stacking on top of each other for anyone with respiratory issues in a Cariboo community this summer.
Switching lanes entirely — Business Insider reports Meta launched a new AI coding model called Muse Spark 1.1, with what CEO Mark Zuckerberg called "very aggressive" pricing, explicitly calling out rivals' pricing as extreme by comparison.
Worth noting for anyone using AI coding tools locally — pricing wars between the big model providers tend to trickle down fast into cheaper access for smaller developers and hobbyists, including rural ones building small tools on a budget.
A rare case where Silicon Valley's competitive instincts actually help the little guy.
And sticking with the lighter tech news — WIRED reports over a thousand Pokémon Go players packed into Times Square for the game's tenth anniversary, finally defeating Mewtwo in a surprise event, fulfilling a promise Niantic teased in the very first launch trailer back in 2016.
A decade to deliver on a tease — some backlogs are just fun rather than frustrating.
One more from the financial world before we move to closer-to-home stories — Business Insider is flagging renewed worry on Wall Street that the Japanese yen could spark another "widespread damage" scenario for stocks if the yen carry trade unwinds again, the same dynamic that rattled markets before.
Currency instability halfway around the world doesn't sound like a Cariboo story until it hits interest rates on local agricultural loans and equipment financing — that's usually how it actually lands here.
Also worth noting today, a handful of items further from the theme but worth a quick line each. The Northern Miner reports Osisko Development's drilling has extended high-grade gold zones deeper at the Cariboo gold project right here in central BC — below the currently defined resource envelope. Shares rose on the news.
That one's a direct, local example of the industry-versus-wild-space tension we're about to spend the Deep Dive on — happening in our own backyard, not just in Washington or Utah.
ScienceDaily reports oak trees keep absorbing carbon dioxide well after their annual growth has stopped for the season, which complicates the models scientists use to estimate how much carbon a mature forest can actually bank over its lifetime.
Good news, potentially, for anyone hoping standing old-growth in this region is doing more quiet climate work than the visible growth rings alone would suggest.
ScienceAlert is also flagging record-breaking concentrations of gold discovered on the seafloor — with the obvious follow-up question of whether anyone should actually mine it, given what deep-sea extraction does to hydrothermal vent ecosystems. The Northern Miner separately reports the IUCN warning that over sixty percent of vent-dwelling mollusc species face extinction risk from proposed seabed mining.
Same tension as the Cariboo gold story, just underwater instead of underground — extraction pressure running up against fragile, poorly understood ecosystems.
And ScienceDaily debunked the old claim that baby rattlesnakes are more dangerous than adults because they supposedly can't control their venom — turns out young rattlesnakes dose it just as precisely as adults do.
File that one under useful trivia for anyone hiking the grasslands around the Fraser Canyon or the Chilcotin benches this summer.
Last one — TechRadar reports Accenture has confirmed a breach after a hacker stole thirty-five gigabytes of source code and other data. Not a rural story directly, but a reminder that even the biggest consulting firms in the world aren't immune to basic security failures.
That's the roundup for today — let's head into something a little more hands-on.
If you've got kids restless for the outdoors this summer, Scout Island Nature Centre in Williams Lake is running programs all season, volunteer-operated by the Williams Lake Field Naturalists. Each week has its own theme — Water one week, Bugs the next, Birds after that — real hands-on nature education right on the lake, with kids getting their hands dirty instead of just reading about it. Sign-up details are at scoutisland dot c-a.
Volunteer-run and still delivering a full season of weekly programming like that — that's the kind of infrastructure that never makes a press release but actually holds up year after year.
And that gap — between what gets announced with fanfare and what actually holds up on the ground once nobody's watching — is exactly where we're headed next.
Start with the appointment. Stevan Pearce running the BLM — two hundred and forty-five million acres, and he comes out of oil and gas, not out of a park service or a state wildlife agency. Who runs the agency that decides what happens to public land tells you a lot about what that land is actually understood to be for.
It tells you the administration's priority walking in. It doesn't automatically tell you the outcome. Interior secretaries and agency heads have come from industry before and still ended up expanding protections when political pressure or litigation demanded it — public comment periods and court exposure constrain even a director who'd rather not be constrained.
Except Outside asked him directly how he'd weigh conservation and recreation against industry demand, and the framing of that question already tells you industry is the baseline he's measured against, not the exception. Recreation and conservation are the things he has to justify accommodating, not the other way around.
That's a real read of the optics. But BC isn't the BLM model — we don't have one federal land boss weighing all three uses against each other in a single office. Crown land here runs through the Ministry of Forests, wildlife management areas, park boards, and increasingly negotiated agreements with First Nations. The decision point is more distributed than in the American system.
Distributed doesn't automatically mean balanced. It can just mean there are more doors for industry to walk through, and more places for a recreational user or a conservation voice to get lost in the process. The Omineca wetland expansion from the roundup is a good example — protected for biodiversity, clean water, and recreation, all folded into the same designation. Nobody's told us yet what "recreation" actually permits inside a wildlife management area versus what it permits inside a full park.
It usually means non-motorized access stays open, but road-building and resource extraction get case-by-case review rather than a blanket prohibition. That's not nothing — it's a real tier of protection above unregulated Crown land, even if it falls short of park status.
Which is the same halfway status we've circled before with grizzly corridors in the Chilcotin — protection on paper, extraction pressure continuing underneath. Osisko's drilling is literally extending gold zones deeper under the Cariboo gold project this very week, and shares rose on the news. That's not a hypothetical industry pressure point. That's an active mine expanding under land some of us actually hike and hunt.
The counterpoint is that a permitted, monitored mine operating inside BC's environmental assessment framework is a genuinely different animal than unregulated seabed mining threatening vent species, which is the other extraction story in today's feed. One has decades of regulatory precedent behind it. The other has almost none.
Sure, but more regulatory history doesn't mean the regulation reflects who actually uses the land day to day. Recreation users and Tŝilhqot'in stewardship priorities aren't parties to a mining permit review in the way an assessment office or a shareholder group is.
Here's where I'd actually shift the frame, though — not who's making the decision, but how people experience the landscape while that decision-making happens somewhere well above their heads. The Dick Proenneke piece from the roundup is about someone going into Alaska's backcountry specifically to be self-reliant and alone, disconnected from all of that governance noise entirely. That's still a real and growing way people use wild spaces — not as a resource fight, but as an escape from resource fights.
Which is a privilege that assumes the backcountry stays intact enough to escape into in the first place. Proenneke's cabin worked because Lake Clark wasn't being drilled underneath him while he sat there for thirty years. Solitude as a lifestyle depends on someone else winning the extraction argument first, somewhere upstream of the person enjoying the quiet.
Not entirely — plenty of Cariboo residents already treat the bush that way regardless of who holds tenure nearby. Trapline families, hunters, people who go out for a week with no cell signal on purpose. The character of that experience doesn't collapse the day a mining claim gets staked three ridges over. It erodes slowly, at the edges, not all at once.
Slowly, at the edges, until it doesn't. Ask anyone who used to hike near a cutblock that eventually became an active haul road. The edge moves faster than people expect once the permits actually clear.
Which loops back to Pearce, actually — he's inheriting decisions on places like Bears Ears, where conservation and recreation groups spent years building the public case for protection, only to watch industry access potentially reopen under new leadership with a different philosophy. That's the real risk with concentrating that much land under one appointee: continuity depends entirely on who's sitting in the chair, not on any durable piece of law underneath them.
Right. And that's the argument for a fundamentally different kind of durability — not who's in the chair, but what's written into a title or an agreement that survives a change in chair regardless of politics. Tŝilhqot'in Aboriginal title, recognized by the Supreme Court of Canada, doesn't evaporate when a new minister takes over the file or an election changes the government. That's a structurally stronger form of protection than any single appointee's personal priorities, however well-intentioned.
Which is genuinely the more interesting comparison to Pearce than anything happening inside the BLM's org chart. A title-holding nation's authority over land use doesn't rotate out with an election cycle. The BLM model concentrates enormous discretion in one appointed person who serves at the pleasure of whoever's in the White House. The Tŝilhqot'in title model distributes durable authority into a governing body that answers to its own community across generations, not to a four-year political calendar.
And that's precisely the distinction the roundup's wetland story sidesteps entirely — "wildlife management area" is a provincial regulatory designation that can be redrawn by cabinet order whenever priorities shift. Title is different in kind. It's not a program that lapses when funding runs out or an election flips; it's a recognized legal relationship to the land itself, independent of any single government's budget cycle.
So the actual design question for a place like the Cariboo isn't "how do we get a better BLM appointee" — that's genuinely a US problem we're just watching unfold from a distance. It's whether more of the province's multi-use designations can be built with title-holding nations as decision-makers from the outset, rather than added later as a stakeholder to be consulted after the framework's already drafted.
That's the harder ask, though, because it means the province permanently gives up some of its own regulatory discretion, not just for the length of a pilot project or a grant cycle. Every negotiated co-governance agreement we've covered on this show — Haida in Gwaii Haanas, Dehcho in the NWT — took years of sustained political will that nobody can guarantee shows up again the next time a designation comes up for renewal.
Political will is genuinely scarce, but it isn't the only lever available. Regulatory defaults matter just as much — right now, a wildlife management area's recreation and conservation status can be weakened by a routine cabinet order with no special process attached. If new designations were structured so that any future downgrade required the same co-decision process as the original designation, that single design choice would remove a lot of the "protection on paper" problem you keep flagging.
Structurally, that's a real fix — it converts what's currently a unilateral policy choice into something closer to a standing bilateral agreement. It still needs someone to actually legislate that clause in the first place, which puts you right back at the same political will problem, just restated one level up the chain.
Fair — but it's a narrower ask than "rebuild the entire governance model from scratch." It's one clause, in one kind of designation, applied going forward. Narrower asks tend to clear legislatures more often than sweeping structural overhauls do, precisely because they're easier for a minister to defend to their own caucus.
Granted, that's a more tractable version of the ask. Still worth someone actually proposing it in writing rather than assuming the next wetland announcement will include that safeguard by default, because right now nothing suggests it will.
Which is a genuinely concrete thing a community group in this region could raise directly — write to the Ministry of Forests, or bring it up at a Cariboo Regional District board meeting, and ask specifically whether new wildlife management area designations in this district include co-decision language with the relevant nation for any future downgrade, not just for the initial announcement.
And on the individual, day-to-day side, the smaller version of this same question is just: how does someone actually using these landscapes right now find out whose authority applies to the ground they're standing on? Half the practical value of a title relationship gets lost if a hiker or a hunter never learns it exists at all.
That's less a governance problem and more an information and signage problem, honestly — which is a meaningfully cheaper fix than any of the legislative changes we've just been discussing. Trailhead panels, recreation site postings, even a basic overlay on an existing recreation map noting title areas alongside the standard provincial boundaries.
Cheaper, sure, but it only stays accurate if someone actually maintains it — the same maintenance question we've hit before on monitoring infrastructure and camera traps. A sign is only correct the day it's installed unless somebody's job is to keep updating it as things change.
Which is maybe the honest place to land today — this isn't primarily a funding gap, it's an ownership gap. The legal tools and even the mapping technology to make wild-space decisions durable already largely exist, here and elsewhere. What's public record shows the pieces are mostly in place. Full transparency, we're working from published sources here rather than direct conversations with any nation's communications office on this specific question — but what's publicly available still points the same direction: the missing piece isn't another tool, it's which institution is actually accountable for keeping any of it current once the initial announcement fades from the news cycle.
That's a sharper question than "who's the new BLM director," honestly. It's: in the Cariboo specifically, who owns the update six months from now, two years from now — the province, the nation, or nobody? Because right now, on most of these designations, the honest answer is mostly nobody.
If any listener has a concrete example of how a specific Cariboo designation actually handles that ongoing accountability — whether that's the Tŝilhqot'in National Government, Williams Lake First Nation, Xatśūll, or another nation with a real working answer — send it our way. That's the kind of ground-truth story we'd genuinely want to build a future episode around.
Feedback at cariboo signals dot c-a if you've got that story, a correction, or just want to weigh in on where the next wetland designation should actually land.
Genuinely curious what that answer looks like in practice, not just in a press release. Enjoy your weekend out there.
Enjoy your weekend.